Predicting Lagging Asset Volatility in Lead-Lag
Asset Pairs
Aarush Chaubey, Asim Ali, William Xu, Annie Yao
December 2024
Abstract
When pricing European option using the Black-Scholes model, it is of-
ten not possible to know the exact implied volatility of the asset. Thus, in
practice, quants have resorted to other methods: deriving volatility from
other options on the same asset, extrapolating using historical volatility,
or using GARCH models to estimate volatility. In this project, we derive
a strategy to dynamically estimate the volatility of the lagging asset in a
highly correlated time-delayed pair.
1 Introduction
When trying to price an option, the difficulty of using the Black-Scholes model
is in obtaining an accurate measure of implied volatility. In our example, we
will assume that we have
• r, the risk free rate of return,
• S, the current price of the asset,
• K, the strike price of the option,
• T , the time to expiration,
and our goal is to estimate said volatility, denoted σ.
Suppose assets A and B are highly correlated with a lead-lag relationship such
that a change in the price of the leading asset, A, drives changes in the price
of lagging asset, B, τ time later. We assume that change in volatility of A,
denoted σA, also implies a change in volatility of the B, denoted σB, after a
delay—thus, we will use the former to predict the latter. However, due to the
time delay, liquidity, and other conditions specific to each asset, the relationship
between σA and σB may have too much noise to reliably predict one from the
other directly.
To account for this, we use a ternary search to find the value τ that maximizes
the correlation, ρ, of SA and SB over a given window of time Θ. τ should repre-
sent the delay both in the change in the stock prices, as well as the volatilities.
1
Thus, we can perform a linear regression on σA and σB after matching each data
point σB to one τ time earlier, σAτ , to obtain the equation σB = µσAτ + β.
Now, we can use this regression to forecast σB from σAτ .
2 Dataset
For our data, we chose two stocks that we believe to be highly correlated and
to have a lead-lag relationship, being Cleveland-Cliffs (CLF) and Nucor (NUE).
All of the data of the stock was obtained using yfinance, a Python library that
downloads market data directly from Yahoo! Finance’s API. All of the data is
from the most recent month, and limited to 1-minute intervals at the shortest.
3 Methods
3.1 Searching for τ
To optimize for τ, we compare the historical stock data for S1, S2 over a certain
time frame Θ = [ t1, t2] such that all pairs ( t1, t2) ∈ N+ × N+. Adding τ to this
time frame shifts Θ to be [ t1 + τ, t2 + τ].
We define a correlation function C(S1(Θ+ t), S2(Θ)) , where the leading stock is
t minutes ahead of the lagging stock. Effectively, our claim is that τ maximizes
C.
Because of this claim, we note that τ ′ < τ → C(τ ′) < C (τ) Furthermore
τ ′ > τ → C(τ ′) < C (τ). Thus, C(τ ′) is concave over the interval we are
searching, so we can use ternary search to maximize C.
def ternary_search(l, r):
eps = 600 #predefined value
while r - l > eps:
m1 = l + (r - l) // 3
m2 = r - (r - l) // 3
print(m1, m2, l, r)
f1 = C(m1)
f2 = C(m2)
# print(f1, f2)
if f1 < f2:
l = m1
else:
r = m2
return (l+r)//2 #final-correlation=0.926
2
After adjusting for tau, our data looks like this.
3.2 Defining C
After shifting the leading asset by τ ′, we take the correlation of corresponding
pairs of elements in the shifted S1 and S2. Because there exist values in both
lists for which there are no corresponding values, we remove all such values.
After this, we calculate the correlation using NumPy.
3.3 Calculate Historical Volatility
We now have to find the scale factorρ such that σ′
1 = ρσ′
2 where σ′
1 is calculated
over Θ+ τ and σ′
2 is calculated over Θ. To do this, we use the same lists as in 3.2
and calculate their respective volatility arrays using a historical volatility model.
This model involves calculating a rolling standard deviation over a window size
of 60 minutes.
3
Then, we use Scikit to linearly regress these volatilities, leading to µ = 0.76505
and β = −7.788 · 10−4.
4 Results
To test our model, we used Cleveland Cliffs (CLF) as our leading asset and
Nucor (NUE) as our lagging asset, and we considered the value of their stocks
in 1-minute intervals over a 7-day period. As we were not able to acquire
the historical data for the options, we are unable to compare our calculated
volatility with the actual implied volatility based on the market price of the
options. However, we are able to compare the value of µ (the ratio of σ1 to σ2)
across multiple different models.
In the following graph, the green line represents historical volatility, blue rep-
resents our correlated volatility, and orange represents the GARCH forecasted
volatility.
1. GARCH Predicted Volatility: 0.06058
2. Our Predicted Volatility: 0.01461
3. Historical Volatility: 0.00102
Because of its low order of magnitude, the historical volatility is not able to
accurately predict the lagging asset’s volatility. However our predicted volatil-
ity is the same order of magnitude as GARCH, providing some credibility of
accuracy.
5 Limitations
In very liquid markets, visible lags are nearly immediately corrected for by the
market. The smallest interval of time the API from which we pulled our data
4
from is able to offer is one minute, which means that any lag will usually be
correct for well under the interval. Even in less liquid markets or scenarios where
there may exist consistent time delay (e.g. large-cap and small-cap stocks in
the same industry), the 1-minute interval is still too wide. Ideally, we would be
able to backtest on data with, at the very least, 1-second intervals.
Furthermore, even though the outset of our strategy was to calculate volatil-
ity for option pricing with Black-Scholes, we were unable to source historical
data on the options of our assets. Instead, the volatility data used for the lin-
ear regression was directly calculated from the stock data. Thus, there may
have been a discrepancies between the computed data and the actual implied
volatility obtained from the market price of the options of the assets.
This also meant that we were unable to compare the results to actual historical
data to evaluate its accuracy. We could only compare it to other volatility
forecasting models, which, based on our dataset, may not be as accurate of a
metric.
Possible ways to improve the accuracy of our model include potentially dynami-
cally recalculating τ over shorter periods of time. In some cases, our volatilities
over the 60-minute time window were very highly linearly correlated, but in
other cases the correlation was less strong or less linear—possibly indicating
that using one value of τ across the whole day may be inaccurate.
5